Spark History Server ADR (#253)
stackabletech/documentation: modules/contributor/pages/adr/ADR022-spark-history-server.adoc

it only if available and if the Spark application developer has requested it. See the chapter below, on how `SparkApplication`s
can request logging events to an existing history server.

The most important part of the history server definition is the location of the event files. This is specified in the
`logFileDirectory` entry of the resource specification as shown below.

[source,yaml]
----
  ...
  logFileDirectory:
    s3:
      prefix: eventlogs/
      bucket: # S3BucketDef
        bucketName: spark-eventlogs
        connection:
          reference: eventlogs-s3-connection
  ...
----

Here the event files are stored in the S3 bucket `spark-eventlogs` with the `eventlogs/` prefix. The complete definition
of the specified S3 connection is resolved by the operator from the `eventlogs-s3-connection` resource (not shown here).

All Spark history properties can be defined in the `properties` section. The operator will make them available to the
server at runtime. The operator makes no effort to validate these properties so extreme care must be taken making use
of this section. In particular, properties concerning the event file storage can conflict with the definition provided

> in the `logFileDirectory` section and it's not recommended to set them here at all.

Reviewer: So these are raw config settings? Would it make sense to use the regular `configOverrides` pattern here?

Reviewer 2: I suggested the exact same thing first but our spark-k8s experts suggested to keep that in line with the `SparkApplication` CRD where it's called `sparkConf`.
@razvan do we want to rename `properties` to `sparkConf`?

Author: Fine by me.

  logFileDirectory:
    s3:
      prefix: eventlogs/
      bucket: # S3BucketDef
        inline:
          bucketName: spark-eventlogs
          connection:
            inline:
              host: minio
              port: 9000
              accessStyle: Path
              credentials:
                secretClass: history-server-s3-credentials
----

== History Server Usage

Spark applications don't have to use a history server but it's highly recommended to do so in production environments.
The section `eventLogs` of a `SparkApplication` instructs the operator to configure the application such that it can be
monitored using the provided (and existing) history server.

The example below shows the relevant configuration snippet of an application definition:

[source,yaml]
----
---
apiVersion: spark.stackable.tech/v1alpha1
kind: SparkApplication
metadata:
  name: spark
  namespace: default
spec:
  version: "1.0"
  sparkImage: docker.stackable.tech/stackable/spark-k8s:3.3.0-stackable0.1.0
  eventLogs: # Optional complex enum. Currently only supports a reference to a history server
    historyServer:
      name: history # reference, see above

>       namespace: default # optional

Reviewer: What is the typical expectation here, are tenants expected to share a single historyserver or deploy their own?

Reviewer 2: I would say we need to support both. If i would really need to pick a "typical" one i would say tenants tend to have their own dedicated history server because it's  so easy to set up with Stackable ;)

Reviewer: Do we need some way to control which namespaces are allowed to refer to a given `HistoryServer` then?

...
----

In the example above, the application will log its events to the history server instance referenced with:
[source,yaml]
----
  eventLogs:
    historyServer:
      name: history # reference, see above
      namespace: default # optional
----

In addition, the application processes data from a S3 bucket configured within the `s3connection` section of the specification.

The operator will read the host and port (endpoint) from the `HistoryServer` and compare them with the equivalent fields
specified for the "data" `s3connection`. If these fields match, it will set `spark.eventLog.enabled` property to `true` and will
construct the `spark.eventLog.dir` from `s3a://<SparkHistoryServer.eventLogs.s3.bucket.bucketName/<SparkHistoryServer.eventLogs.s3.prefix>`.

=== Constraints

The constraint with the highest impact with this approach is that `SparkApplications` can only log events
to the same S3 endpoint they use for data processing. In addition, `SparkApplications` use the same credentials to log
events to S3 as well as process data from the same service.

NOTE: the credentials used by the `HistoryServer` *do not* have to be shared with `SparkApplication`s.

> This constraint is a consious design decision and a compromise between flexibilty and ease of use.

Reviewer: Is this a design decision on our end or Spark's? How does this restriction help ease of use?

Reviewer 2: It's a design decision on our side. By adding this restriction a SparkApplication can simply reference a HistoryServer CRD and everything will work automatically :rocket: 
If the need arises to use a different endpoint (and therefore credentials) we can add a new enum variant that supports users to specify a S3BucketDef on where to log to. Which gives full power but the possibility to misconfigure e.g. different buckets for the application logging into and the history server reading from.

Reviewer: What's the motivation to not just read this from the `HistoryServer` CRD, the need for separate credentials?

I think this is a risky requirement to add since it'd effectively make this unusable for the (I expect) fairly common demo scenario of "read public dataset from public S3, write logs to local Minio/whatever".

= ADR022: Spark history server
Sönke Liebau <soenke.liebau@stackable.de>
v0.1, 2022-08-23
:status: pending

* Status: {status}
* Deciders:
** Andrew Kenworthy
** Sebastian Bernauer
** Razvan Mihai
* Date: 2022-08-23

== Context and Problem Statement

Monitoring Spark applications usually involves two types of components: a history server and a metrics collection server.
__In this document we will concern ourselves with the history server__. Using metrics for application monitoring requires
a completely different set of protocols and technologies and is outside the scope of this document.

The Spark histroy server is part of the Apache Spark distribution and it provides a web interface where application

> developers can vizualize events that took place during the lifetime of a job as well as the outcome of various job phases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
developers can visualize events that took place during the lifetime of a job as well as the outcome of various job phases.
```

In this document, we propose a way to add the Spark history server to the Kubernetes resources that are managed by the
Spark-on-Kubernetes operator. We also describe how Spark application definitions can leverage the history server and
how the resource definitions make use of standard Stackable descriptors for S3 storage.

Even though using a history server is optional when running Spark applications on the Stackable platform, it is highly
recommended to make use of it in production environments.

== Decision Drivers

* Ease of use / intuitive / checked
* Support multiple history servers per operator installation
* Integrate with the Stackable platform resource handling for S3 storage

== Decision Outcome

> Chosen option: TODO (after presentation to/consultation with team)

Reviewer 3: I think we can remove this as it has been given the OK by the team.

Author: Done.

== History Server Definition

> A history server is a separate entity, completely decoupled from any `SparkApplication`s. The Spark-on-k8s makes use of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A history server is a separate entity, completely decoupled from any `SparkApplication`s. The Spark-on-k8s operator makes use of
```

it only if available and if the Spark application developer has requested it. See the chapter below, on how `SparkApplication`s
can request logging events to an existing history server.

The most important part of the history server definition is the location of the event files. This is specified in the
`logFileDirectory` entry of the resource specification as shown below.

[source,yaml]
----
  ...
  logFileDirectory:
    s3:
      prefix: eventlogs/
      bucket: # S3BucketDef
        bucketName: spark-eventlogs
        connection:
          reference: eventlogs-s3-connection
  ...
----

Here the event files are stored in the S3 bucket `spark-eventlogs` with the `eventlogs/` prefix. The complete definition

> of the S3 connection is specified is resolved by the operator from the `eventlogs-s3-connection` resource (not shown here).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
of the specified S3 connection is resolved by the operator from the `eventlogs-s3-connection` resource (not shown here).
```

              port: 9000
              accessStyle: Path
              credentials:
                secretClass: history-server-s3-credentials
----

== History Server Usage

Spark applications don't have to use a history server but it's highly recommended to do so in production environments.
The section `eventLogs` of a `SparkApplication` instructs the operator to configure the application such that it can be
monitored using the provided (and existing) history server.

The example below shows the relevant configuration snippet of an application definition:

[source,yaml]
----
---
apiVersion: spark.stackable.tech/v1alpha1
kind: SparkApplication
metadata:
  name: spark
  namespace: default
spec:
  version: "1.0"
  sparkImage: docker.stackable.tech/stackable/spark-k8s:3.3.0-stackable0.1.0
  eventLogs: # Optional complex enum. Currently only supports a reference to a history server
    historyServer:
      name: history # reference, see above
      namespace: default # optional
  s3connection: # Optional. Used for normal data operations.
    inline:
      host: minio
      port: 9000
      accessStyle: Path
      credentials:
        secretClass: application-s3-credentials
...
----

> In the example above, the application will log it's events to the history server instance referenced with:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the example above, the application will log its events to the history server instance referenced with:
```

[source,yaml]
----
  eventLogs:
    historyServer:
      name: history # reference, see above
      namespace: default # optional
----

> In addition, the application processes data from a S3 buucket configured within the `s3bucket` section of the specification.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition, the application processes data from a S3 bucket configured within the `s3connection` section of the specification.
```

The operator will read the host and port (endpoint) from the `HistoryServer` and compare them with the equivalent fields

> used of the "data" `s3bucket`. If these fields match, it will set `spark.eventLog.enabled` property to `true` and will

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
specified for the "data" `s3connection`. If these fields match, it will set `spark.eventLog.enabled` property to `true` and will
```

construct the `spark.eventLog.dir` from `s3a://<SparkHistoryServer.eventLogs.s3.bucket.bucketName/<SparkHistoryServer.eventLogs.s3.prefix>`.

=== Constraints

> The constraint with the highest impact with this approach is that, `SparkApplications` can only log events

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The constraint with the highest impact with this approach is that `SparkApplications` can only log events
```

to the same S3 endpoint they use for data processing. In addition, `SparkApplications` use the same credentials to log
events to S3 as well as process data from the same service.

> NOTE: the credentials used by the `HistoryServer` *do not* have to be shared with `SparkApplications`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NOTE: the credentials used by the `HistoryServer` *do not* have to be shared with `SparkApplication`s.
```

This constraint is a consious design decision and a compromise between flexibilty and ease of use.

=== Advantages

Referencing the history server instance directly from a Spark application makes it clear where the event files are stored
and ensures there is a single point of configuration for this location, namely in the `HistoryServer` specification.

This approach allows for future extensions (addition of new fields) to the log storage to be implemented in a non-breaking fashion (which would not be the case if separate distinct sources were implemented as a first step and then reversed later).
  
=== Future work

Future changes might allow decoupling the `SparkApplication` from the history server reference by implementing

> direct referrences to the event storage.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
direct references to the event storage.
```
